The "Find Longest Path" python script, developed by Steven Loyd for use here at Rice University, was created to assist archivists locate any instances within an AIP where the file path exceeds 256 characters. 

When an AIP contains a file path that exceeds 256 characters, the AIP will not migrate to a new location and will not ingest into Archivemtica (AM).

Many of the collections we acquire contain either folders nested within folders or files that have exceedingly long file names. Or both. It is highly inefficient for the Digital Archivist (DA) or Processing Archivist (PA) to manually search through an AIP for long file paths. Therefore, Steven developed this script to quickly search for and list any instances where a file path exceeds the 256-character threshold.

Please note: The script only identifies ONE file path error at a time. Once the error has been corrected, you must run the script over again untill all errors are identified and corrected.

Here are step-by-step instructions for the ppt-to-pdf.py script:

Prior to being moved to a Transfer Source or Waiting Room location, please run the findlongestpath.py script. The script has been placed in all "Ready-for-AM" folders within the Processing area. The script has also been placed in every "FAILED" folder within the Transfer Source area. The script will work on any and all AIPs within the folder.

Within any Processing Ready-for-AM folder or any FAILED folder, run findlongestpath.py. 

For this script, you MUST use the PowerShell window when you run the script. The PowerShell window will provide the file path error that you can follow to the location where the file lives within the AIP. 

To run the script press down Shift + right-click in the folder and click "Open PowerShell window here." 

In the PowerShell window, input "python findlongestpath.py".
Note that only the PowerShell method will allow you to see errors, should any occur. If you double click the script and it doesn't produce a report, you should run it in PowerShell and see what's happening.
POWERSHELL IS THE PREFERRED OPTION

Please be aware:
The script will run on any and all AIPs within the folder the script is being run in (can be just 1 AIP at a time or several batched together).

If an error occurs, the PowerShell window will list the entire file path and also display how many characters the path actually is.

The script only works on one error at a time. You will have to run the script after every error correction until there are no longer any errors listed.